# Page 116 A 25-Year-Old Female School Teacher from Malawi With Abrupt Onset of Fever and Confusion EMMA C. WALL Clinical Presentation History A 25-year-old Malawian primary school teacher presents to a local central hospital. She was reported to be well at 8 a.m., confused by 10 a.m. and drowsy with a high fever and con-vulsions on admission at 11 a.m. She is HIV-positive and has been on first-line antiretrovi-ral therapy (ART) with tenofovir, lamivudine and efavirenz for 6 months with good adherence. Her CD4 count on start-ing ART was 320 cells/μL. She completed treatment for pul-monary tuberculosis 2 months ago. Clinical Findings The patient is restless and agitated; Glasgow Coma Scale 10/ 15. Pupils are equal and reactive with photophobia; the neck is stiff and there is no rash. Plantar responses are down-going, Kernig’s sign is positive. Chest and abdominal examinations are unremarkable. Temperature 40°C (104°F), pulse 125bpm, blood pressure 125/68mmHg, oxygen saturation 93% on room air. During the physical examination she suf-fers a renewed seizure. Laboratory Results Her blood results are shown in Table 16.1. A spinal tap is done. The CSF appears hazy; CSF results are shown in Table 16.2. Rapid antigen test for Plasmodium falciparum is negative. Questions 1. What are your treatment priorities for this woman? 2. What adjunctive interventions should be used in this setting? Discussion A 25-year-old Malawian woman, known to be HIV-positive and on ART, presents with acute severe symptoms including a high fever, a rapid decline in consciousness and new onset convulsions, suggesting a severe neurological infection. Her CSF is hazy and shows a neutrophilic pleocytosis, as well as a high CSF-protein and low glucose. TABLE 16.1 Blood Results on Admission Parameter Patient Reference WBC ( 109/L) 10.54-10 Neutrophil count ( 109/L) 8.92.5-6 Haemoglobin (g/dL) 8.912-14 MCV (fL) 8578-90 Platelets ( 109/L) 255150-400 Creatinine (μmol/L) 10635-106 Random blood glucose (mmol/L) 5.63.9-7.8 TABLE 16.2 Results on Admission Parameter Patient Reference Leukocytes (cells/μL) 35 (60% neutrophils) 0-5/μL Protein (g/L) 2.60.15-0.42 Glucose (mmol/L) 1.22.5-540 # Page 2 Bacterial meningitis is the most likely diagnosis; tubercu-lous meningitis and cryptococcal meningitis are possibilities, though much less likely, since they tend to present in a sub-acute manner. Answer to Question 1 What Are Your Treatment Priorities for This Woman? The suspected diagnosis is acute bacterial meningitis. In Africa Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of meningitis in adults and children. Additionally, in the meningitis belt, seasonal outbreaks of bacterial meningitis caused by Neisseria meningitis occur during the dry season. Case numbers have dropped considerably after the introduc-tion of large-scale vaccination programmes. The immediate treatment priority is emergency resuscita-tion, including rapid administration of antibiotics. A third-generation cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone at a high dose to penetrate the CSF is appropriate; where this is not available, high dose benzylpenicillin plus chloramphenicol is a suitable alternative. Resistance rates of S. pneumoniae to both penicil-lins and chloramphenicol are rising, hence local advice about resistance patterns should be sought. Data to guide resusci-tation in adults are limited, but airway support and seizure control are indicated. Public health services are required for case management to ensure that appropriate vaccination programmes and case notification for outbreak monitoring are done. Answer to Question 2 What Adjunctive Interventions Should be Used in This Setting and What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? Several meta-analyses suggest that while in well-resourced countries dexamethasone should be given to adults and chil-dren presenting to hospital with meningitis, steroids should not be used in resource-limited hospitals in Africa given their lack of efficacy. Glycerol has been tested in paediatric men-ingitis with mixed results but was shown to be harmful in adults with meningitis in Malawi. No other adjuncts have been tested in clinical trials to date; adjunctive treatment is not indicated. In cases of suspected meningitis, a lumbar puncture (LP) must be undertaken to obtain a diagnosis. Despite clinical contraindications to lumbar puncture in this patient (sei-zures and altered conscious level), the risk of causing harm by doing an LP is low. LP should not be delayed by attempts to obtain cerebral imaging unless obvious signs of a space-occupying lesion are present. CT scan of the brain is of lim-ited value in bacterial meningitis. Administration of antibi-otics should not be delayed while the LP is undertaken, particularly in resource-limited settings. The main differential diagnoses for this patient are cryp-tococcal meningitis (CCM) and TB meningitis (TBM). However, her CD4 count is too high for CCM and her recent completion of TB treatment makes TBM less likely. In addition, both of these infections classically have a more chronic course. She is not pregnant, therefore meningitis caused by Lis-teria monocytogenes is very unlikely. Bacterial pathogens that cause meningitis in HIV-infected adults include S. pneumo-niae, group A streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, invasive non-typhoidal salmonellae, Salmonella typhi, Escherichia coli and Haemophilus influenzae; all will be treated with a third-generation cephalosporin. European guidelines recommend 14 days of antibiotics in HIV-infected adults with bacterial meningitis. However, in sub-Saharan Africa often shorter courses are given, determined by the patient’s recovery rate, local guidelines and availability of antibiotics for long courses. In children with bacterial meningitis in Malawi, 5 days of ceftriaxone was shown to be non-inferior to ten days, with substantial savings shown, and shorter courses are now commonly used. The Case Continued… In the emergency department the patient received ceftriax-one 2g IV, 10mg of diazepam IV and 600mg of phenobar-bitone IV. Her oxygen saturation improved with resuscitation. She received 10 days of IV ceftriaxone and recovered consciousness by day 3. CSF culture grew S. pneu-moniae. Audiometry revealed a minor hearing loss in her right ear. No further neurological impairment or seizures were noted; anticonvulsants were weaned by day 3. SUMMARY BOX Acute Bacterial Meningitis In resource-rich settings, acute bacterial meningitis in adults and children is declining in incidence because of successful vaccination campaigns, but sporadic cases continue to occur. In contrast, many countries with high HIV prevalence have reported an increase in patients presenting with acute bacterial meningitis (ABM) since the start of the HIV epidemic. Case fatality rates in resource-rich settings have declined from 45-50% to 11-25% over the past 50 years, associated with early administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics and better sup-portive care. In contrast, adult ABM lethality rates in sub-Saharan Africa are reported to vary between 50 and 70% without any change over time, and survivors experience higher rates of neurological disabilities. Adjunctive treatments have failed to reduce lethality in large randomized controlled trials in Africa despite efficacy elsewhere. In well-resourced settings, important risk factors for poor outcome include advanced age, hyperglycaemia and immunosuppression. In Africa, coma, seizures, anaemia and delayed presentation to hospital are poor prognostic features. Antibiotic treatment depends on local sensitivities. A third-generation cephalosporin at high dose given as early as possible is the treatment of choice. 41 CHAPTER 16 A 25-Year-Old Female School Teacher from Malawi With Abrupt Onset of Fever and Confusion # Page 3 Further Reading 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [chapter 71]. 2. van de Beek D, Cabellos C, Dzupova O, et al. ESCMID guideline: diagnosis and treatment of acute bacterial meningitis. Clin Micro-biol Infect 2016;22(Suppl 3):S37-S62. 3. Wall EC, Mukaka M, Denis B, et al. Goal directed therapy for sus-pected acute bacterial meningitis in adults and adolescents in sub-Saharan Africa. PloS One 2017;12(10)e0186687. 4. van de Beek D, Farrar JJ, de Gans J, et al. Adjunctive dexametha-sone in bacterial meningitis: a meta-analysis of individual patient data. Lancet Neurol 2010;9(3):254-263. 5. Global Burden of Diseases Study Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of meningitis, 1990-2016: a systematic anal-ysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet Neurol 2018;17(12):1061-1082. 42 CHAPTER 16 A 25-Year-Old Female School Teacher from Malawi With Abrupt Onset of Fever and Confusion