# Page 187 A 27-Year-Old Male Traveller Returning from the Peruvian Amazon With Persisting Polyarthralgias ANDREAS NEUMAYR Clinical Presentation History A 27-year-old male Swiss tourist spent 3.5 weeks travelling in the rainforests of the Amazon Basin in northern Peru. Dur-ing the second week of his stay he developed an acute febrile illness with chills, malaise, frontal headache, generalized myalgia and a transient, non-pruritic maculopapular rash. The rash started on the forearms about 1 week after the onset of fever and spread to the trunk, neck and face before fading after 3 days. In addition, there were slowly progressive debilitating polyarthralgias affecting the peripheral joints accompanied by transient joint swelling. He also noticed painful cervical and inguinal lymphadenopathy, which was self-limiting, lasting for about 1 week. The traveller presented at the local hospital, where physi-cians made a clinical diagnosis of dengue fever, and he received symptomatic treatment with paracetamol. Although the fever and the other symptoms subsided within 1 week, the polyarthralgias did not improve, showing a symmetrical pattern mainly affecting the small joints of the hands and feet as well as the wrists, ankles, and knees. Upon return home to Switzerland a few weeks later, the patient consulted his general practitioner because of persist-ing, incapacitating polyarthralgias. The patient reported stiff-ness of the affected joints, mainly in the morning and after immobility. Physical examination of the affected joints did not reveal any clinical signs of inflammation (swelling, red-ness, effusion). Laboratory tests were performed including serologicaltestingfordenguevirus,chikungunyavirus,parvo-virus B19, Epstein-Barr virus, Borrelia burgdorferi, Chlamydia trachomatis, Salmonella Typhi, and S. Paratyphi but none revealed a cause for the symptoms. For two more months, the joint pains did not improve; thus the patient was referred to a rheumatologist and subsequently to a tropical medicine clinic for evaluation of a putative travel-related cause of his polyarthralgias. Clinical Findings The physical examination was completely unremarkable. The affected joints did not reveal any clinical signs of inflam-mation (no swelling, no redness, no effusion). Laboratory results Full blood count was normal. C-reactive protein was mildly elevated at 9 mg/L (<5), liver function tests were normal. Questions 1. What are your differential diagnoses? 2. What diagnostic test would you perform? Discussion A 27-year-old male Swiss tourist presents with persisting and incapacitating symmetrical polyarthralgias primarily affect-ing the small peripheral joints after returning from a trip to the Amazon Basin of northern Peru. The patient reports an acute self-limiting febrile illness accompanied by a rash before the onset of the polyarthralgias, which had clinically been diagnosed as dengue infection at a local hospital in Peru. Answer to Question 1 What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? Two main differential diagnoses should be considered in patients presenting with persisting or prolonged arthritis/ arthralgias and a history of a preceding infection: 242 # Page 2 Reactive arthritis (Reiter’s syndrome): Reactive arthritis is a rheumatoid factor (RF)-seronegative, HLA-B27-linked arthritis often preceded by an infection. The most common triggers are gastrointestinal infections (caused by Salmonella, Shigella or Campylobacter) and sexu-ally transmitted infections (Chlamydia trachomatis). Reactive arthritis may manifest as monoarthritis (often affecting the knee or sacroiliac joint) or as oligoarthritis (usually of the lower extremities). The course may be additive (i.e. more joints becoming inflamed in addition to the primarily affected one) or migratory (new joints becoming inflamed after the initially inflamed joint has already improved). It usually develops within 2 to 4 weeks of the preceding infec-tion. Reactive arthritis may also manifest with the classical triad of symptoms termed “Reiter’s syndrome”: (i) inflam-matory arthritis of large joints, (ii) inflammation of the eyes manifesting as conjunctivitis or uveitis and (iii) urethritis in men or cervicitis in women. Other musculoskeletal manifes-tations include enthesitis (often involving the Achilles ten-don) and dactylitis. In some cases, mucocutaneous lesions (circinate balanitis) or psoriasis-like skin lesions (keratoderma blennorrhagicum) may be present. Clinical manifestation may vary widely and patients may be oligosymptomatic. In the majority of cases the complaints are self-limiting and subside under symptomatic treatment with non-steroidal drugs over weeks to months. Viral arthritis: Although self-limiting polyarthralgias are present during the acute phase of many viral infections, prolonged polyar-thritis/polyarthralgias are characteristic for certain viral infec-tions. Worldwide, parvovirus B19, hepatitis B and C, HIV, rubella and the alphaviruses are the most common infections to consider in the differential diagnosis. Although rubella has become rare because of vaccination, the vector-borne, alphaviral infections are becoming increasingly rele-vant in endemic regions and in returning travellers (see Table 87.1). Unlike reactive arthritis, viral arthritis primarily presents as symmetrical polyarthritis of peripheral small joints. TABLE 87.1 Characteristics of Human Pathogenic Alphaviruses Virus Epidemiology and Endemic Regions Occurrence and Number of Reported Cases Frequency of Main Symptoms (%) Chikungunya Tropical and subtropical regions of Asia, Africa and Latin America Large sporadic epidemics Fever: 90 Rash: 40-50 Myalgia: 90 Arthralgia/arthritis: >95 Sindbis Virus Group Eurasia, Africa, Australia, Oceania; primarily reported from West Russia (“Karelian fever”), Finland (“Pogosta disease”), and Sweden (“Ockelbo disease”) Geographically most widely distributed alphavirus (lack of data on human cases) Karelian fever: rare (no data) Pogosta disease: 140 cases (range 1-1282)/year Ockelbo disease: 30 cases/year Fever: 15-40 Rash: 90 Myalgia: 50 Arthralgia/arthritis: 95 Ross River Australia, Papua New Guinea, West Papua 5000 cases per year in Australia; in 1979-1980 an epidemic with >60000 cases hit some pacific islands (New Caledonia, Fiji, Samoa, Cook Islands) Fever: 20-60 Rash: 40-60 Myalgia: 40-80 Arthralgia/arthritis: 80-100 Barmah Forest Australia 2000 cases/year Fever: 50 Rash: 40-60 Myalgia: 50-80 Arthralgia or arthritis: 70-95 O’Nyong Nyong East Africa Rare epidemics; >2 million cases in 1959-1961 Fever: 80-100 Rash: 70-90 Myalgia: 70 Arthralgia/arthritis: 60-100 Mayaro South America, primarily the Amazonian rainforest, Caribbean Sporadic single cases and small outbreaks (involving 10-100 cases) Fever: 100 Rash: 30-50 Myalgia: 75 Arthralgia/arthritis: 50-90 Adapted from Suhrbier, A., Jaffar-Bandjee, M.C., Gasque, P., 2012. Arthritogenic alphaviruses-an overview. Nat Rev Rheumatol, 8(7):420-9. 243 CHAPTER 87 A 27-Year-Old Male Traveller Returning from the Peruvian Amazon With Persisting Polyarthralgias # Page 3 Answer to Question 2 What Diagnostic Test Would You Perform? The diagnostic principles for most alphaviruses are the same: During the first days of the acute infection, detection of viral RNA in the blood by PCR may confirm the diagnosis. Beyond the acute phase, the diagnosis is based upon serolog-ical detection of specific IgM and IgG antibodies against the respective virus. Cross-reactivity within the same virus family is common. Reference laboratories therefore usually perform parallel testing for potentially cross-reacting viruses (see Table 87.2) and apply a two-step approach, using highly sen-sitive screening assays followed by highly specific confirma-tory assays. The Case Continued… Given the patient’s travel history, the course of the illness and the clinical signs and symptoms experienced during the jour-ney, Mayaro virus (MAYV) infection was strongly suspected. (Chikungunya was not yet endemic in the Americas at the time this patient was seen). The serological results (Tab. 87.2) confirmed the sus-pected diagnosis of Mayaro infection. The patient received symptomatic treatment with ibuprofen, and the polyarthral-gias subsided slowly over the following weeks and months before finally disappearing completely. SUMMARY BOX Mayaro-Fever Mayaro-virus is an alphavirus. Alphaviruses are arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) that circulate among a wide variety of wild animals in relative mosquito vector-specific and host-specific enzootic cycles; infection of humans (dead-end hosts) is exclusively incidental. The Mayaro virus (MAYV) circulates in an enzootic, sylvatic cycle (similar to that for yellow fever) involving forest-dwelling Haemagogus species mosquitoes as vectors and non-human primates as natural hosts. Infections in humans mostly occur sporadically, are strongly associated with occupational or recreational exposure in rainforest environments and represent spillover from the enzootic cycle. MAYV has so far been only reported from South America and the Caribbean. Mayaro infection presents as a dengue-like, febrile illness lasting 3 to 7 days. It typically manifests with chills, headache, retro-orbital and epigastric pain, myalgia, arthralgia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and a maculopapular rash (sometimes followed by desquamation). Haemorrhagic manifestations have been described but are rare. Like other alphaviruses, Mayaro may cause debilitating and long-lasting polyarthralgias, which are suspected to arise from the inflammatory immune response stimulated by the prolonged virus persistence in joint tissues. Treatment is exclusively symptomatic with non-steroidal drugs. Symptoms subside slowly over weeks to months. Permanent damage of the affected joints is not reported. Further Reading 1. Young PR, Ng LFP, Hall RA, et al. Arbovirus Infections. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [chapter 14]. 2. Schmitt SK. Reactive Arthritis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2017; 31(2):265-77. 3. SuhrbierA,Jaffar-BandjeeMC,GasqueP.Arthritogenicalphaviruses-an overview. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2012;8(7):420-9. 4. Acosta-Ampudia Y, Monsalve DM, Rodríguez Y, et al. Mayaro: an emerging viral threat? Emerg Microbes Infect 2018;7(1):163. 5. Blohm G, Elbadry MA, Mavian C et al. Mayaro as a Caribbean trav-eler: Evidence for multiple introductions and transmission of the virus into Haiti. Int J Infect Dis 2019;87:151-3. TABLE 87.2 Results of the Serological Testing for Alphavirus Infections Performed in Our Case Blood Sample Taken on 29 August Blood Sample Taken on 12 September Virus IgM-IFA IgG-IFA PRNT IgM-IFA IgG-IFA PRNT Interpretation of test result Mayaro 1280256040402560160 positive Sindbis <20160 <20 <20160 <20 negative Chikungunya <20160 n.d. <20160 n.d. negative Ross River <20160 n.d. <20160 n.d. negative Barmah Forest <2020 n.d. <2020 n.d. negative IFA: indirect immunofluorescence assay (screening assay) PRNT: plaque reduction neutralization test (confirmatory assay) n.d.: not done (screening assay negative [and epidemiologically not supported]) 244 CHAPTER 87 A 27-Year-Old Male Traveller Returning from the Peruvian Amazon With Persisting Polyarthralgias