# Page 1 Foreword Twenty years following the launch of the Millennium Devel-opment Goals, malaria and neglected tropical diseases remain pervasive, especially among the world’s poor. Infor-mation from the recently published Global Burden of Dis-ease Study 2017 confirms that the world’s major tropical infections, including malaria and the 20 major neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) identified by the World Health Organization, exert a horrific toll on human life1,2. Together these diseases kill an estimated 720,000,1 while causing chronic and disabling effects measured in DALYs (disability-adjusted life years) that exceed almost any other cause of illness.2 Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS are also dev-astating infections that disproportionately occur in tropical developing countries. Even beyond their adverse health impact, the leading tropical diseases are significant causes of economic underde-velopment. Indeed, malaria and the NTDs are probably the most common diseases of poor people and have been shown to thwart economic productivity through their negative effects on child health and the productivity of agricultural workers.3 So far in 2020, we have also seen how a coronavi-rus, a zoonotic disease from bats, can profoundly affect the world’s second largest economy-China. Yet another impor-tant effect-tropical infectious diseases also disproportion-ately devastate girls and women through their ability to damage the female urogenital tract or cause disfigurement and stigma.4 Tropical diseases are the secret scourge of girls and women. Despite their enormous global importance, there is a sur-prising lack of knowledge about tropical diseases among health care professionals including physicians. For example, recent studies from the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention indicate that very few US medical doctors know how to recognize and diagnose Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis) even though it is now an impor-tant cause of heart disease in the US.5,6 As a result, thousands of Chagas disease cases may go undiagnosed every year and patients inadvertently denied access to essential trypanocidal medicines. This finding emphasizes an emerging concept in tropical medicine that many parasitic and related infections occur outside of the poorest countries, with high levels of transmission also occurring in generally wealthy countries such as in the US or Eastern and Southern Europe.7,8 The term ‘blue marble health’ has been coined to account for the finding that many of the world’s neglected tropical diseases are found predominantly among the extreme poor living amidst wealth.9 In other words, poverty has emerged as the overriding social determinant of neglected tropical dis-eases. But poverty is not the only social or physical determi-nant now driving 21st century diseases, as increasingly, we increasingly see how war or political collapse, urbanization, and climate change influence disease patterns10-12. Clinical Cases in Tropical Medicine (‘Clinical Cases’) is a key companion volume to the 23rd Edition of Manson’s Tropical Diseases, but it will also be useful alongside other complete tropical medicine textbooks. An important role for Clinical Cases is to provide important practical applica-tions and illustrative case reports in order to reinforce the material in these comprehensive texts. Comprised of over 100 detailed clinical cases from as many tropical medicine physicians across the world, Clinical Cases provides an excel-lent learning opportunity to reinforce concepts on practical approaches to the diagnosis, management, and treatment of the major tropical diseases endemic to Africa, Asia and the Americas. This new edition also contains important updates regarding emerging tropical diseases such as Zika virus infec-tion and malaria caused by Plasmodium knowlesi, among other conditions. The book should be useful for trainees and practitioners working in disease-endemic developing countries, as well as those working in clinical settings that see immigrants or travelers from affected regions and now people living in poverty in North America and Europe who also suffer from these afflictions. Clinical Cases should serve as a powerful learning tool for years to come! Peter Hotez MD PhD FAAP FASTMH* References Cited 1. GBD 2017 Causes of Death Collaborators. Global, regional, and national age-sex specific mortality for 282 causes of death in 195 countries and territories, 1980-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet 2018;392:1736-88. 2. GBD 2017 DALYs and HALE Collaborators. Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) for 359 *Peter Hotez is Texas Children’s Hospital Endowed Chair of Tropical Pediatrics, Professor of Pediatrics and Molecular Virology and Micro-biology, and Dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas. x # Page 2 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet 2018;392: 1859-922. 3. Hotez PJ, Fenwick A, Savioli L, et al. Rescuing the bottom billion through control of neglected tropical diseases. Lancet 2009;373: 1570-5. 4. Hotez PJ, Engels D, Gyapong M, et al. Female genital schistoso-miasis. N Engl J Med 2019;381:2943-5. 5. Stimpert KK, Montgomery SP. Physician awareness of Chagas disease, USA. Emerg Infect Dis 2010;16:871-2. 6. Verani JR, Montgomery SP, Schulkin J, et al. Survey of obstetrician-gynecologists in the United States about Chagas dis-ease. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010;83:891-5. 7. Hotez PJ, Jackson Lee S. US Gulf Coast states: The rise of neglected tropical diseases in “flyover nation” PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(11):e0005744. 8. Hotez PJ. Southern Europe’s Coming Plagues: Vector-Borne Neglected Tropical Diseases. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2016;10(6): e0004243. 9. Hotez PJ. NTDs V.2.0: ‘Blue marble health’-neglected tropical disease control and elimination in a shifting health policy land-scape. PLOS Negl Trop Dis 2013;7:e2570. 10. Du RY, Stanaway JD, Hotez PJ. Could violent conflict derail the London Declaration on NTDs? PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2018;12(4): 0006136. 11. Hotez PJ. Global urbanization and the neglected tropical diseases. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(2):e0005308. 12. Blum AJ, Hotez PJ. Global “worming”: Climate change and its projected general impact on human helminth infections. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2018;12(7):e0006370. xi Foreword