# Page 1 Preface Clinical Cases in Tropical Medicine was written for doctors and senior medical students who already have some back-ground knowledge in tropical medicine which they wish to put into practice. It helps the reader prepare for an occu-pational stay in a tropical country and is equally useful for preparing for examinations, like the Diploma in Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (DTM&H) or a specialist examina-tion. It can also just be used by anyone who takes pleasure in puzzling cases in tropical medicine for the mere fun of it! This book has been developed as a companion book to Man-son's Tropical Diseases; however, it can be read alongside any other textbook of tropical medicine. It can also be used on its own since every case presentation closes with a ‘summary box’ providing a brief synopsis of the clinical problem dis-cussed. The “summary box” is also meant to serve as a useful and compact tool for revision, e.g. before an exam. The first edition of this book was a great success: Doctors and medical students around the world use it for self-study and teaching all over the world. This second edition of Clin-ical Cases in Tropical Medicine has been updated and extended and contains 30 new cases. Important “classical” tropical diseases missing in the first edition have now been added, such as African trypanosomiasis, chagas, leprosy and yaws. The world’s epidemiological picture is rapidly changing: cases of newly emerging diseases have been included, such as Zika, Severe Fever with Thrombocytope-nia Syndrome (SFTS) and Knowlesi malaria. In addition, migrant medicine has become of growing importance to cli-nicians in non-tropical countries. This novel trend is reflected by new cases in migrant medicine and contain decriptions eg. of louse-borne-relapsing fever, spinal brucel-losis and hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly. On behalf of our team of authors from all over the world we hope you enjoy the second edition of this book. xii